<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Dramatis Personae</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dramatis Personae</h2>
			<section id="characters-in-the-play" epub:type="z3998:subsection">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Characters in the Play</h3>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>AGAMEMNON, son of Atreus and King of Argos and Mycenae; Commander-in-Chief of the Greek armies in the War against Troy.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>CLYTEMNESTRA, daughter of Tyndareus, sister of Helen; wife to Agamemnon.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>AIGISTHOS, son of Thyestes, cousin and blood-enemy to Agamemnon, lover to Clytemnestra.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>CASSANDRA, daughter of Priam, King of Troy, a prophetess; now slave to Agamemnon.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>A WATCHMAN.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>A HERALD.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>CHORUS of Argive Elders, faithful to AGAMEMNON.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</section>
			<section id="characters-mentioned-in-the-play" epub:type="z3998:subsection">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Characters Mentioned in the Play</h3>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>MENELÂÜS, brother to Agamemnon, husband of Helen, and King of Sparta. The two sons of Atreus are called the Atreidae.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>HELEN, most beautiful of women; daughter of Tyndareus, wife to MENELÂÜS; beloved and carried off by Paris.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>PARIS, son of Priam, King of Troy, lover of Helen. Also called ALEXANDER.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>PRIAM, the aged King of Troy.</p>
					</li>
					<!-- TODO does this go inside this section? -->
					<li>
						<p>The Greeks are also referred to as Achaians, Argives, Danaans; Troy is also called Ilion.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>The play was produced in the archonship of Philocles (458 B.C.). The first prize was won by Aeschylus with the “Agamemnon”, “Libation-Bearers”, “Eumenides”, and the Satyr Play “Proteus”.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
